MSC2313: Moderation policies as rooms (ban lists) (#2313)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2313-ban-lists.md

# MSC2313: Ban lists

> Matrix is an open network and anyone can participate in it.  As a result, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matrix is an open network and anyone can participate in it. As a result, a
```

very wide range of content exists, and it is important to empower users to be

> able to select which content they wish to see, and wish they to block.  By

Reviewer: ```suggestion
able to select which content they wish to see, and which they wish to block. By
```

extension, room moderators and server admins should also be able to select
which content they do not wish to host in their rooms and servers.

The protocol's position in this solution should be one of neutrality: it
should not be deciding what content is undesirable for any particular entity and
should instead be empowering those entities to make their own decisions. This
proposal introduces ban lists as a basic mechanism to help users manage this
process, by providing a way of modelling sets of servers, rooms and users

> which can then be used to make filtering decisions.  This proposal makes no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which can then be used to make filtering decisions. This proposal makes no
```

attempt at interpreting the model and actually making those decisions however.

To reaffirm: where this proposal says that some content is undesirable it does not intend to
bias the reader into what that could entail. Undesirability is purely in the hands of the
entity perceiving the content. For example, someone who believes birthday cake is undesirable
is perfectly valid in taking that position and is encouraged by this proposal to set up or
use a ban list which prevents birthday cake from coming across their field of view.

## Proposal

> Ban lists are represented in rooms, allowing for structures and concepts to be reused without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ban lists are stored as room state events, allowing for structures and concepts to be reused without
```

defining a new room version. This proposal does not make any restrictions on how the rooms

> are configured, just that the state events described here are represented in the room. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are configured, just that the state events described here are represented in a room. For
```

"The" implies some specific room but we don't seem to introduce "the room for ban lists".

Actually, the entire paragraph is a bit heavy to read while it boils down to just two things (and the first one is reiterated in the next paragraph):
- Ban lists take form of state events in (arbitrary) rooms;
- Any legit Matrix room is good for that.

example, a room which is invite only is just as valid as a room that is not: the important
details are specific state events and not the accessibility, retention, or other aspects
of the room.

Ban lists are stored as `m.room.rule.<kind>` state events, with state keys being arbitrary IDs
assigned by the sender. The `<kind>` is currently one of `user`, `room`, and `server`. Three
fields are defined in `content`:

> * `entity` (`string`) - **Required.** The entity/entities affected. Simple globs are supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `entity` (`string`) - **Required.** The entity/entities the recommendation applies to. Simple globs are supported
```

            "entity": "*.evil.example.org",
            "recommendation": "m.ban",
            "reason": "undesirable engagement"
        }
    }
]
```

When the entity is a room, it can be a room alias or ID - the subscriber is responsible for
resolving it to a room ID (if it wants to).

Non-standard recommendations are permitted using the Java package naming convention for
namespacing. A `recommendation` is just a recommendation: how implementations apply the rules
is left as a concern for those implementations. The only standard `recommendation` currently
defined is `m.ban`: The `entity` should be banned from participation where possible.

The enforcement mechanism of `m.ban` is deliberately left as an implementation detail to avoid the
protocol imposing its opinion on how the lists are interpreted. However, a suggestion for
a simple implementation is as follows:

* Is a user...
  * Applied to a user: The user should be added to the subscriber's ignore list.
  * Applied to a room: The user should be banned from the room (either on sight or immediately).
  * Applied to a server: The user should not be allowed to send invites to users on the server.
* Is a room...

>   * Applied to a user: The user should leave the room and not join it (MSC2270-style ignore).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Applied to a user: The user should leave the room and not join it
    ([MSC2270](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2270)-style ignore).
```

process, by providing a way of modelling sets of servers, rooms and users
which can then be used to make filtering decisions. This proposal makes no
attempt at interpreting the model and actually making those decisions however.

To reaffirm: where this proposal says that some content is undesirable it does not intend to
bias the reader into what that could entail. Undesirability is purely in the hands of the
entity perceiving the content. For example, someone who believes birthday cake is undesirable
is perfectly valid in taking that position and is encouraged by this proposal to set up or
use a ban list which prevents birthday cake from coming across their field of view.

## Proposal

Ban lists are stored as room state events, allowing for structures and concepts to be reused without
defining a new room version. This proposal does not make any restrictions on how the rooms
are configured, just that the state events described here are represented in a room. For
example, a room which is invite only is just as valid as a room that is not: the important
details are specific state events and not the accessibility, retention, or other aspects
of the room.

> Ban lists are stored as `m.room.rule.<kind>` state events, with state keys being arbitrary IDs

Reviewer 2: `m.room.rule` makes this sound to like a rule about this particular room

Reviewer: `m.room.rule.<kind>` events are room events though. With that said, I don't have strong opinions here. There's not much value in prepending every room event type with `m.room.`, and we already have a few room events that don't follow that practice. If this particular case looks really confusing (to me it doesn't) I'm fine to drop it. @turt2live, @ara4n?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I don't know whether prefix all room events with `m.room` is necessarily useful, but if that's the convention I'm fine with it. Would maybe suggest `m.room.banlist.rule.<kind>` or maybe `m.room.banrule.<kind>` which I think makes it sound more like the application-specific thing it is rather than some kind of rule primitive for the room (perhaps we should have namespaced events that define the room itself separately from the content of a room... oh well).

Reviewer 3: I'd be more in favour of breaking the convention than indicating that these are ban list rules. As mentioned somewhere, this is less about ban lists and more about policy definitions - implementations aren't required to ban people and could ignore the `recommendation`. We do have the convention of room events being `m.room.*`, but for this case I'd be happy with `m.policy.rule.<kind>` or something. 

Part of my personal mission for X as rooms is to have them be application specific anyways, so event naming conflicts (generalized versus not) are resolved by using a different application-specific room. In future we could also expand upon policy rules, and it would be a shame to have to define a new set of modules for such a thing.

Reviewer: "m policy rule" sounds like very neat English for the purpose - certainly better than "m room rule".

Reviewer 2: I think the problem here is that we don't want to include the word 'ban', but the name of the MSC is "Ban Lists", which implies we need to find a name we're happy to use to refer to this in the spec.

Reviewer 3: Renaming the MSC to "Moderation policies as rooms (ban lists)" might solve the problem then?

Reviewer 3: oob: rename the MSC, call the events `m.moderation.rule.<kind>`
